README.md, before:

# cicada

study of programming language design and implementation

> Remember, <br>
> an engineer solve problem, <br>
> an engineer does not want just a religion about how to solve a problem. <br>
> -- Gerry Sussman

### study of parsing techniques

- [partech](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/partech) <br>
  A parser generator, with various parsing techniques
  - [Earley parser](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/partech/parsing_techniques/Earley.scala) <br>
    O(n^3) for context free grammar

### study of scope

- [eopl/lang_let](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_let) <br>
  - scope!
- [eopl/lang_proc](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_proc) <br>
  - lexical scope! (closure)
- [eopl/lang_letrec](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_letrec) <br>
  - recursive scope! (by a trick in the env lookup function)
- [eopl/lang_nameless](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_nameless) <br>
  - nameless scope! (a.k.a. de bruijn index)

### study of assignment

- [eopl/lang_explicit_refs](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_explicit_refs) <br>
  - explicit reference (address)
- [eopl/lang_implicit_refs](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_implicit_refs) <br>
  - distinguish `denoted value` from `expressed value` for mutable variable. <br>
    this is also called call-by-value parameter-passing.
- [eopl/lang_mutable_pairs](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_mutable_pairs) <br>
  - remember Dan's paper "Cons should not evaluate its arguments" ? <br>
    this is preparation for it.
- [eopl/lang_call_by_reference](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_call_by_reference) <br>
  - marking an arg `ref` when passing it to a function, <br>
    will make it be an explicit ref like in `lang_explicit_refs`
- **TODO** [eopl/lang_call_by_need](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_call_by_need) <br>
  - remember Dan's paper "Cons should not evaluate its arguments" ? <br>
    this is about it. <br>
  - call-by-need is also called lazy-eval.

### study of lambda calculus with types

- [barendregt/de_bruijn](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/barendregt/de_bruijn) <br>
  - de bruijn stype simple type lambda calculus <br>
  - implemented by term rewriting

### study of type inference

- **TODO** [miniml](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/miniml) <br>
  - "A simple applicative language: Mini-ML" <br>
  - by Dominique Clement, Joelle Despeyroux, Thierry Despeyroux, Gilles Kahn

### study of normalization by evaluation (a.k.a. norm-by-eval (a.k.a. NbE))

- [lambda](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/lambda) <br>
  - The untyped lambda calculus
- [syst](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/syst) <br>
  - Kurt Gödel's system T <br>
  - simply typed lambda calculus with natural number
- [tartlet](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/tartlet) <br>
  - "Checking Dependent Types with Normalization by Evaluation: A Tutorial" <br>
  - by David Thrane Christiansen ([the original tutorial](http://davidchristiansen.dk/tutorials/nbe)) <br>
  - since tartlet is little pie, recursion is also not an option here.
- [minitt](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/minitt) <br>
  - "A simple type-theoretic language: Mini-TT" <br>
  - by Thierry Coquand, Yoshiki Kinoshita, Bengt Nordström, Makoto Takeyama <br>
  - no termination check, thus when viewed as logic it is unsound.

### study of function composition and stack machine

- [adventure/jojo_untyped](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/adventure/jojo_untyped) <br>
  - de bruijn notation implemented by threaded code
- [adventure/jojo_simple](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/adventure/jojo_simple) <br>
  - **TODO** [**paper**](docs/paper/simply-typed-jojo-calculus.md):
    "Simply Typed JoJo Calculus", by Xie Yuheng
  - two levels of computations -- `exe` and `cut`, where `cut` is simple.
- **TODO** [adventure/jojo_dependent](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/adventure/jojo_dependent) <br>
  - two levels of computations -- `exe` and `cut`, where `cut` is as powerful as `exe`.

### references

- Parsing Techniques -- A Practical Guide, Second Edition <br>
  - by Dick Grune and Ceriel J.H. Jacobs
- Essentials of Programming Languages (a.k.a. EOPL) <br>
  - by Daniel P. Friedman and Mitchell Wand
- Lambda Calculus with Types <br>
  - by Henk Barendregt, Wil Dekkers and Richard Statman

## Usage

- Build: `sbt stage`
  - test: `./dev t`
  - find executables at `./target/universal/stage/bin/`
- Example code at: [example](example)

## Community

- We enforce C4 as collaboration protocol -- [The C4 RFC](https://rfc.zeromq.org/spec:42/C4)
- [Style Guide](STYLE-GUIDE.md) -- observe the style of existing code and respect it
- [Code of Conduct](CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- [Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/xieyuheng/cicada)

## License

- [GPLv3](LICENSE)

Commit message:

- [eopl.lang_call_by_reference]

README.md, after:

# cicada

study of programming language design and implementation

> Remember, <br>
> an engineer solve problem, <br>
> an engineer does not want just a religion about how to solve a problem. <br>
> -- Gerry Sussman

### study of parsing techniques

- [partech](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/partech) <br>
  A parser generator, with various parsing techniques
  - [Earley parser](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/partech/parsing_techniques/Earley.scala) <br>
    O(n^3) for context free grammar

### study of scope

- [eopl/lang_let](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_let) <br>
  - scope!
- [eopl/lang_proc](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_proc) <br>
  - lexical scope! (closure)
- [eopl/lang_letrec](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_letrec) <br>
  - recursive scope! (by a trick in the env lookup function)
- [eopl/lang_nameless](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_nameless) <br>
  - nameless scope! (a.k.a. de bruijn index)

### study of assignment

- [eopl/lang_explicit_refs](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_explicit_refs) <br>
  - explicit reference (address)
- [eopl/lang_implicit_refs](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_implicit_refs) <br>
  - distinguish `denoted value` from `expressed value` for mutable variable. <br>
    this is also called call-by-value parameter-passing.
- [eopl/lang_mutable_pairs](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_mutable_pairs) <br>
  - remember Dan's paper "Cons should not evaluate its arguments" ? <br>
    this is preparation for it.
- [eopl/lang_call_by_reference](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_call_by_reference) <br>
  - marking an variable `ref` when passing it to a function, <br>
    will not create new `ref` and reuse the ref of the variable, <br>
    thus make callee be able to set caller's variable.
- **TODO** [eopl/lang_call_by_need](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/eopl/lang_call_by_need) <br>
  - remember Dan's paper "Cons should not evaluate its arguments" ? <br>
    this is about it. <br>
  - call-by-need is also called lazy-eval.

### study of lambda calculus with types

- [barendregt/de_bruijn](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/barendregt/de_bruijn) <br>
  - de bruijn stype simple type lambda calculus <br>
  - implemented by term rewriting

### study of type inference

- **TODO** [miniml](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/miniml) <br>
  - "A simple applicative language: Mini-ML" <br>
  - by Dominique Clement, Joelle Despeyroux, Thierry Despeyroux, Gilles Kahn

### study of normalization by evaluation (a.k.a. norm-by-eval (a.k.a. NbE))

- [lambda](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/lambda) <br>
  - The untyped lambda calculus
- [syst](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/syst) <br>
  - Kurt Gödel's system T <br>
  - simply typed lambda calculus with natural number
- [tartlet](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/tartlet) <br>
  - "Checking Dependent Types with Normalization by Evaluation: A Tutorial" <br>
  - by David Thrane Christiansen ([the original tutorial](http://davidchristiansen.dk/tutorials/nbe)) <br>
  - since tartlet is little pie, recursion is also not an option here.
- [minitt](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/minitt) <br>
  - "A simple type-theoretic language: Mini-TT" <br>
  - by Thierry Coquand, Yoshiki Kinoshita, Bengt Nordström, Makoto Takeyama <br>
  - no termination check, thus when viewed as logic it is unsound.

### study of function composition and stack machine

- [adventure/jojo_untyped](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/adventure/jojo_untyped) <br>
  - de bruijn notation implemented by threaded code
- [adventure/jojo_simple](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/adventure/jojo_simple) <br>
  - **TODO** [**paper**](docs/paper/simply-typed-jojo-calculus.md):
    "Simply Typed JoJo Calculus", by Xie Yuheng
  - two levels of computations -- `exe` and `cut`, where `cut` is simple.
- **TODO** [adventure/jojo_dependent](src/main/scala/xieyuheng/adventure/jojo_dependent) <br>
  - two levels of computations -- `exe` and `cut`, where `cut` is as powerful as `exe`.

### references

- Parsing Techniques -- A Practical Guide, Second Edition <br>
  - by Dick Grune and Ceriel J.H. Jacobs
- Essentials of Programming Languages (a.k.a. EOPL) <br>
  - by Daniel P. Friedman and Mitchell Wand
- Lambda Calculus with Types <br>
  - by Henk Barendregt, Wil Dekkers and Richard Statman

## Usage

- Build: `sbt stage`
  - test: `./dev t`
  - find executables at `./target/universal/stage/bin/`
- Example code at: [example](example)

## Community

- We enforce C4 as collaboration protocol -- [The C4 RFC](https://rfc.zeromq.org/spec:42/C4)
- [Style Guide](STYLE-GUIDE.md) -- observe the style of existing code and respect it
- [Code of Conduct](CODE-OF-CONDUCT.md)
- [Travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/xieyuheng/cicada)

## License

- [GPLv3](LICENSE)
